Perturbation of soil microbial communities by rising temperatures could have important consequences for biodiversity and future climate, particularly in tropical forests where high biological diversity coincides with a vast store of soil carbon. We carried out a two-year in situ soil warming experiment in a tropical forest in Panama and found large changes in the soil microbial community and its growth sensitivity, which did not explain observed large increases in CO2 emission. Microbial diversity, especially of bacteria, declined markedly with 3 to 8ºC warming, demonstrating a breakdown in the positive temperature-diversity relationship previously observed in temperate-zones. The microbial community composition shifted with warming, with many taxa no longer detected and others enriched, including thermophilic taxa. This community shift resulted in community-adaptation of bacterial growth to warmer temperatures, which we used to predict changes in soil CO2 emissions. However, the in situ CO2 emissions exceeded our model predictions three-fold, likely driven by abiotic acceleration of enzymatic activity. Our results suggest that warming of tropical forests will have rapid, detrimental consequences both for soil microbial biodiversity and future climate.











MAIN
[Authors: our article format allows subheadings in RESULTS to guide readers through the manuscript. I’ve inserted sample headings so that you can amend them. Each subheading should be <56 characters. Further, we have made the decision to publish this as an Article and the main text (not including methods and abstract) can go up to 5000 words, which should allow you to address the concerns of Reviewer #3. Methods do not count towards the word count, so you should have space to expand those as well (see below).

Microbial communities sustain the biosphere by cycling carbon (C) and nutrients between the Earth and the atmosphere. As a result, their response to warming provides a fundamental feedback on the terrestrial C cycle and climate, and will have direct consequences for the function and maintenance of terrestrial biota1. The nature of this feedback is especially critical for tropical forests, because they exchange more carbon dioxide (CO2) with the atmosphere than any other ecosystem, contain over a third of global soil C2, two-thirds of terrestrial plant biomass3, and represent the apex of global terrestrial biodiversity4. Under current emission scenarios, temperatures in the tropics are predicted to warm by 2-5ºC by 21005 and to exceed historical precedent more quickly than anywhere else on Earth6. Despite this, we have almost no information on the magnitude and direction of soil microbial feedbacks under warming for the huge C stores and biodiversity found in tropical forests7.

Climate warming is predicted to increase soil C mineralisation and CO2 emission from soil to the atmosphere8. Numerous experiments performed outside the tropics have shown that warming increases CO2 emission from soil9, and that changes in the microbial community composition and activity determine the associated soil C loss10,11.  In tropical forests where soils contribute a major portion of these ecosystems’ globally significant total C exchange with the atmosphere12, small fractional increases in CO2 emission from soils will have a large impact on the atmosphere and climate. Warming experiments in tropical forests have only recently been initiated and first results point towards a large response. Two years of in situ full-profile soil warming by an average 4ºC increased the soil CO2 efflux by 55% for a tropical forest in Panama13, and significantly for a tropical forest in Puerto Rico under infra-red soil warming by 4ºC (Wood et al, pers. com.). These results provoke key fundamental questions: what are the drivers of the large CO2 emissions from warmed tropical forest soils – and are they related to abiotic or biotic processes, including changes in the composition of the microbial community, its diversity and/or its activity, as found in other ecosystems10,11,14.

The response of soil C to warming is underpinned by changes in soil microbial activity, via the instantaneous sensitivity of microbial growth and respiration, which can be modified over time by adaptive change in the microbial community composition10,15. These microbial responses have been represented in models of soil C temperature sensitivity by the efficiency of growth and respiration16, while the thermal response of growth and respiration has been described by the square root model15,17. In the square root model, the moderating effect of temperature adaptation is described by a change in the theoretical value of Tmin (the minimum temperature for growth), corroborated by observations that Tmin is strongly correlated to mean annual temperature differences across climatic gradients globally18-20. For example, Tmin for bacterial growth ranges from approximately -15ºC in arctic ecosystems to approximately 0ºC for tropical ecosystems, with similar patterns observed for Topt15,19 and for respiration20. Across temperate temperature ranges, Tmin has been observed to increase under experimental warming21,22 alongside community compositional shifts14,23,24, thus indicating that the observed thermal adaptation occurred via microbial community composition change. Despite the proven importance of this relationship in determining the temperature response of activity and its thermal adaptation15,17, we have no information on whether it holds under warming in the lowland tropics, where the mean annual temperature is already close to the predicted optima for metabolic activity15.

The effect of warming on tropical forest soil C will depend not only on the response of the soil microbial community activity7, but also its community composition and diversity, which may have consequences for other biota25. In a temperate forest, two decades of experimental warming increased bacterial diversity,14 specifically for lignin-degrading microbes26; this positive temperature-diversity relationship is consistent with observations across natural temperature gradients where soil pH and moisture are held constant23,27,28. It is unknown whether soil microbial diversity will similarly increase under the novel high-temperature regimes predicted for the tropics6 and will depend on the thermal tolerance of the microbial taxa present24,29. Nor is it understood how diversity change would affect soil process rates, although the effect might be considerable given phylogenetic evidence for high niche specialization among tropical forest microbial taxa30. The historically-novel high temperature regimes predicted for the tropics this century6 (e.g. 2-5ºC atmospheric warming5 added to 1-3ºC warming through land-use change and reduced transpiration31) could result in temperature maxima that exceed a metabolic threshold for portions of the tropical forest soil microbial community, with potentially large implications for ecosystem functioning and the climate.

Here we used an in situ warming experiment to test the response of the soil microbial community, and its growth and respiration to warming over a range of 3 to 8ºC above ambient – thereby providing a test of how tropical forest soil communities and function respond across these levels of warming in a field experiment. The experiment, SWELTR (Soil Warming Experiment in Lowland TRopical forest) consists of five pairs of circular control and warmed plots (whole-profile warming, using buried resistance cables) distributed evenly within approximately 1 ha of semi-deciduous moist lowland tropical forest on Barro Colorado Island, Panama13. Each warmed plot has a ground surface area of ~20 m2 and is heated across the full soil profile, resulting in a total of 120 m3 of warmed soil for the experiment (Extended Data Fig. 1). For this study we established two subplots per treatment plot that differed with distance to the heating source, thus providing two treatments of, on average, 3ºC and 8ºC warming of surface soils (0–20 cm depth). Two years after the warming treatment was initiated, we conducted field campaigns during the wet season (when moisture was non-limiting) to measure soil CO2 efflux, to characterise the temperature sensitivity of instantaneous microbial growth, respiration and enzyme activities, and to determine the microbial community composition. We tested the hypotheses that: (1) warming will change the α-diversity and community composition of soil bacteria and fungi; (2) the temperature sensitivity of microbial communities (with respect to growth, Tmin, and enzymatic activity) will become ‘adapted’ to the new temperature regime (whether adaptation is via genetic change within species, phenotypic plasticity or community-composition change, sensu Pietikäinen et al.; Bradford 32,33); and (3) soil CO2 emission will increase under 3 to 8ºC warming and follow the increase predicted by the temperature sensitivity of microbial growth and respiration.

RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Microbial diversity [please check subheading]
Two years of soil warming reduced the diversity of both bacteria and fungi and caused large shifts in the microbial community composition (Fig. 1). The diversity decline was largest for bacteria, occurring via the loss of proportionally-abundant taxa (Shannon and Inverse-Simpson indices declined; Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 2). For fungi, our results suggest a diversity decline due to loss of rare taxa (species richness declined but not Shannon and Inverse-Simpson indices), although this result is less definitive than for bacteria, given methodological issues influencing the detection of rare taxa (see Supplementary Methods) and our identification of different fungal taxa in warmed soils (see below). Warmed soils also hosted microbial species (defined by Amplicon Sequence Variants, ASVs) that were undetected in soils at ambient temperature, especially among fungi, although the number of newly detected species was too few to offset the number of species no longer detected (Fig. 1). This decline in diversity, especially for the bacteria, may have implications for soil functioning, given the prevailing paradigm of a positive relationship between biological diversity and ecosystem functioning34, also supported for soils35,36. Such a decline in soil microbial diversity under warming is also contrary to positive relationships between temperature and diversity observed in a temperate warming experiment14 and across natural environmental gradients27,28,37. This positive relationship is consistent with metabolic theory of ecology (i.e. positive correlation between energy input, evolutionary rates and diversity)38 and is considered to contribute a positive feedback on tropical plant diversity39,40,41. Our results point towards a breakdown in this energy-diversity relationship for tropical soil bacterial communities after a two-year period where temperatures ranged from 29–34ºC. These temperatures may represent a thermal maximum for the persistence of many species, implying that our findings can also provide insight over timescales longer than the duration of our warming treatment.

Microbial community composition [please check]
Warming also caused large shifts in community composition (Figs. 1–2, Extended Data Figs. 2–5), with many taxa significantly increasing or decreasing in relative abundance with warming by 3ºC, and further with warming by 8ºC (Fig. 1; Extended Data Figs. 3–4). In warmed soils there was a decrease in the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes, a common non-spore-forming bacterial group which comprise taxa that are primary degraders of polysaccharides42. For fungi, there was decrease in the relative abundance of members of the Basidiomycota including the Agaricales, a broad order of saprophytic and ectomycorrhizal fungi, and the ecologically diverse yeast order, Sporidiobolales. In contrast, warming increased the relative abundance of Firmicutes, a diverse and stress-tolerant bacterial phylum, able to form endospores resistant to desiccation and high temperatures43. Indeed, taxa within the Firmicutes have been identified as warm-responsive in laboratory studies24,29 and in field soil warming experiments outside the tropics14,44. Warming also increased the abundance of the class Thermoleophilia within the Actinobacteria, known to include aerobic thermophiles45. For fungi, warming increased the relative abundance of Glomerales—arbuscular mycorrhizae—as also seen in warming experiments outside the tropics46. In addition, warming increased the relative abundance of several orders in the phylum Ascomycota, including the Eurotiales, Hypocreales and Pezizales, which include thermotolerant saprophytic and pathogenic species, as well as saprophytic and pathogenic yeast in the Saccharomycetales. Thus, broadly, changes in diversity under warming occurred alongside shifts in communities towards thermotolerant microorganisms.

Growth adaptation to temperature [please check]
Adaptation of the microbial community to warming potentially can have a large influence on long-term change in soil C emissions10,16. To assess this, we used laboratory incubations to determine the instantaneous temperature sensitivity of bacterial growth (Tmin) following the square root model15,17, whereby changes in Tmin reflect a community-adaptation to temperature, a response empirically related to shifts in the community composition24. In the square root model, the effect of temperature on activity is described by a quadratic increase up to an optimal temperature (Topt,) and then a sharp decline15,17, where the quadratic phase of the increase is constrained by the minimum temperature for activity (Tmin, the y-intercept of the square root of activity plotted against temperature), which is higher for microbial communities adapted to warmer temperatures15. Following two years of experimental warming at our tropical forest site, we found Tmin to increase under 3ºC warming and to increase further under 8ºC warming (Fig. 2); where the observed magnitude of increase in Tmin, of 0.3ºC per 1ºC warming, is consistent with observations made elsewhere15. Furthermore, among all the parameters associated with temperature adaptation in the field experiment, Tmin was the most significant correlate of the change in bacterial and fungal diversity and community composition (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Tables 1–2). Thus, while acknowledging that we cannot exclude an influence of genetic change within species on this temperature adaptation, our results strongly suggest that adaptation occurred through community compositional change, as found elsewhere24, and the development of a microbial community functionally adapted to the warmer conditions.

Soil process rates [please check]
These changes in diversity and community composition occurred alongside altered soil process rates in the field experiment: increased bacterial growth rates, enzyme activity per unit microbial biomass for 7 hydrolytic and oxidative enzymes involved in C, N and P cycling (although microbial biomass remained stable) and, measured in situ, increased soil CO2 emission (Figs. 2–3, Extended Data Figs. 6–7). Soil CO2 emission in the field experiment increased markedly at warmer temperatures: 78% higher than controls under 3ºC warming and 337% higher under 8ºC warming of surface soils (Fig. 3; Extended Data Table 3). The soil CO2 efflux response for the wet season was consistent with the previously-reported 55% increase over 2-years of 3ºC surface soil warming at this experiment (including dry and wet seasons), which was shown to have arisen predominantly from increased heterotrophic microbial activity13. Our observation of increased soil metabolic activity, indicated by increased bacterial growth and enzyme activity with in situ soil warming, describes a further acceleration of heterotrophic activity with warming. Enzymatic activity per unit of microbial biomass increased for 7 out of 10 studied enzymes and markedly at +8ºC in situ warming for enzymes that degrade organic phosphorus, nitrogen, and carbon in phenolic and hemicellulose compounds (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 6–7). Collectively, the observed changes in process rates—of increased respiration, growth and enzymatic activity per unit microbial biomass—corroborate our parallel findings that the microbial community shifted towards favouring thermotolerant taxa that readily persist and even increase in productivity under warmer conditions.

Predicted and observed soil CO2 emission under warming
We used the instantaneous temperature sensitivity of bacterial growth (Tmin) to model the CO2 efflux response to warming, both with (Tmin determined for soil from warmed treatments) and without (Tmin determined for soil from controls) microbial community adaptation. Here we used Tmin for bacteria growth only, because there was no significant difference in the Tmin for bacterial growth (-1.39 ± 0.8) and respiration (0.3 ± 0.4) in control soils (P = 0.1). The Tmin values for bacterial growth in control soils were also similar to those determined independently for two lowland tropical forests in Peru with similar mean annual temperature (-1.66 ± 0.7, -1.77 ± 1.0; MAT = 26.4ºC)19. To model the CO2 efflux response to warming following temperature-adaptation of microbial communities, we refitted the Ratkowsky model (see methods) using the Tmin determined for bacterial growth in experimentally warmed soils for two years by 3ºC and 8ºC (‘adapted’ communities).
The predicted increase in soil CO2 efflux based on the measured temperature sensitivity of microbial respiration and growth in control soils (24–68% increase under 3–8ºC warming; Fig. 3), was substantially exceeded by the observed in situ increase in soil CO2 efflux (78–337% under 3–8ºC warming; Fig. 3). Furthermore, the predicted CO2 emission was only marginally higher when accounting for adaptation of the microbial community to warmer conditions (measured Tmin increase; Fig. 2), resulting in a 25–77% increase under 3–8ºC warming (Fig. 3). Importantly, we found no evidence to suggest that the observed in situ increase in soil CO2 emission occurred due to decreased microbial metabolic efficiency, a common finding in short-term soil warming experiments where high waste respiration exceeds growth47. Reduced metabolic efficiency is inconsistent with our previously reported observation of no decrease in the size of the microbial biomass or in microbial CUE48 (measured using a stoichiometric method, see Supplementary Methods for discussion of this method and its assumptions; Extended Data Fig. 6); a result in line with the independent observation of increased microbial biomass under soil warming in tropical forest in Puerto Rico49. Similarly, we cannot explain the augmented soil CO2 emission by reference to accelerated substrate depletion or substrate depletion alongside priming effects where microbes acquire additional N or P from organic sources50, which would also be expected to cause an eventual decline in microbial biomass48,51. On the contrary, we found no change in microbial biomass despite evidence for substrate depletion (decreased DOC and available P at 8ºC warming; Extended Data Fig. 6). 
Soil warming can also induce soil drying, potentially influencing CO2 emission and other community and process rate changes8. However, our study here was focused on the tropical rainy season and despite lower moisture content in our +8ºC treatment (Extended Data Fig. 6), we expect this had negligible influence on our results because moisture remained non-limiting to microbial activity. Finally, the augmented in situ soil CO2 emission cannot be explained by increased root respiration or substrate supply from root exudates, because by using root-partitioning cores we found that warming had no effect on the root-derived soil CO2 efflux13. Thus, we show that the temperature response of microbial community metabolism to warming—considered in models to be fundamental in explaining the long-term, and relatively large, response of soil C to climate warming16,48—only accounted for 23–32% of the observed in situ soil CO2 emission.

Abiotic processes may increase CO2 emissions [please check]
In addition to biotic processes, our data point towards a further influence of abiotic processes in accelerating CO2 emission at warmer temperatures. By using ex situ soil incubations across 2–40ºC, we found that microbial growth declined at temperatures exceeding 34ºC (Fig. 2); but enzyme activities measured under both ex situ and in situ warming increased—as did in situ soil CO2 emissions (Figs. 2–3; Extended Data Figs. 6-7). These results can be explained by the effect of warming on the soil physico-chemical environment, including chemical oxidation/hydrolysis and desorption of mineral-stabilised organic matter and extracellular enzymes52. Clay-rich soils, such as those found at our tropical forest site, contain a large pool of stabilised C and inactive extracellular enzymes adsorbed to clay minerals.53 At high temperatures desorption reaction rates can overtake adsorption reaction rates54, thereby increasing the pools of active enzymes and labile C, and consequent CO2 emissions. Independent observations support this mechanism of an abiotic contribution to enzyme activity under warming: of high respiration and enzymatic activity in sterilised soils55,56, and of stable enzyme functioning at high temperatures57. Consistent with a rapid increase in the pool of active enzymes driven by desorption, under warming we observed increased Q10 of Vmax for four enzymes including phosphomonoesterase, β-xylanase and β-glucosidase (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 6). This is counter to the prediction of reduced Q10 for ‘warm-adapted’ iso-enzymes thought to result from increased folding and decreased flexibility54,58 but it is consistent with a rapid increase in the pool of active enzymes under warming, driven by desorption reactions59. 
Enhanced soil CO2 emissions driven by accelerated enzyme activities under warming could also occur through chemical oxidation. Under aerobic conditions, oxides of Fe and Mg minerals—abundant in many tropical soils including at our study site—provide electron acceptors that catalyse the degradation of phenol compounds and the formation of reactive organic compounds56,60. Because we focused on responses during the wet season when moisture was non-limiting, soil drying at higher levels of warming may have increased O2 supply, increasing the activity of oxidative enzymes and organic matter oxidation56,60,61. Consistent with this mechanism, soil moisture declined at 8ºC (although not to the extent to cause moisture limitation; Extended Data Figure 6) alongside a marked increase in the activity of phenol oxidase (Extended Data Table 3). It is therefore likely that a combination of these processes resulted in increased enzyme activity that was uncoupled from growth (Fig. 2), contributing substantially to the observed CO2 emissions that exceeded the predicted increase based on standard expectations from the observed temperature sensitivity and warm-adaptation response of the microbial community15 (i.e. it was exceeded by 3.1–4.4 fold; Fig. 3).

CONCLUSION
In summary, our results show a progressive decline in tropical forest soil microbial diversity, especially for bacteria, and clear microbial community compositional shifts with warming (Fig. 1), occurring alongside community growth-adaptation to temperature (Fig. 2) and resulting in further increased CO2 emission (Fig. 3). This response of diversity declines under warming is contrary to observations from temperate forest warming studies14,26. Our data thus provide empirical support for the hypothesis that tropical soil communities are highly sensitive to warming and are consistent with independent evidence for deep evolutionary niche specialization in tropical soil microbes30. Further, we note that in view of the widespread evidence for intensive feedbacks among tropical soil microbial communities, plant diversity, and soil processes25,41, declines in diversity may have substantial implications for the resilience of tropical forest functioning, composition, and diversity in a warmer world. Alongside the decline in diversity observed in this experiment, the concurrent increased abundance of thermotolerant species resulted in a stable microbial biomass, accelerated enzymatic activity, and increased soil CO2 emissions. This finding partially supports prior model-based projections showing increased C loss under climate warming this century due to adaptation of microbial growth16. However, our results go further by demonstrating that microbial models alone do not accurately predict the change in soil C emissions under warming in tropical ecosystems, especially at high temperatures where abiotic processes may accelerate C loss. Further study is urgently required to understand these combined biotic and abiotic controls on soil C in different tropical soils and land-use contexts, the timescales of their effects, and the wider consequences of declines in soil microbial diversity for the functioning and composition of tropical forests in a warmer world.

METHODS
[Authors: please expand the methods in the main text, in line with the reviewer comments. Please note that the methods section does not count towards the 5000 word limit for articles. We can be flexible with the length of the main text methods section, but if you envision going over 10,000 words please let me know and we will figure out what to do. Thanks!]

Site and experiment. The experiment is situated in seasonally moist lowland tropical forest on Barro Colorado Island, Panama. Within the experiment area (1 ha) the dominant tree species include Anarcardium excelsum and Poulsenia armata; a full census of tree and understory species composition in this forest is available for a nearby 50 ha forest plot in forest with similar soils, tree species and demographic composition62. The soils are Inceptisols (Fine, isohyperthermic, Dystric Eutrudepts) that are rich in clay (~54% profile-weighted clay concentration) and secondary metal oxides. The soils developed on the volcanic facies of the Bohio Formation, a basaltic conglomerate of Oligocene age63. Inceptisols account for 14% of total land area in the tropics (Ultisols and Oxisols account for 20% and 23%, respectively)64.

The SWELTR experiment consists of 10 circular plots (five paired plots ‘warm’ and ‘control’). Each plot measures 5 m diameter, with approximately 10 m between each plot-pair and a minimum of 20 m between different plot-pairs. The experiment heats approximately 120 m3 soil in total (5 plots x 5 m diameter by 1.2 m depth). Temperature in the internal plot area (~3 m diameter) of each warmed plot was maintained at 4ºC above the temperature in each corresponding paired control plot, based on the average temperature from 0–120 cm depth at the mid-radius points in each plot. For this study we established subplots representing a high-temperature treatment, situated in a buffer-zone close to the heating cable. We therefore had two subplots per plot, situated at approximately 10 cm and 1 m distance from the one of the main heating rods, representing two different levels of warming. The average warming for the low-warming subplot was 2.8ºC and for the high-warming subplot was 7.9ºC (determined at 0–10 cm soil depth), based on the difference in temperature between control plots. Thus, our study consisted of three treatments, soil at 26 ± 1ºC (‘Control’), 29 ± 2ºC (‘+3ºC’) and 34 ± 7ºC (‘+8ºC’), providing a test of moderate (atmospheric warming with moderate fossil fuel emission reduction) to extreme (atmospheric warming plus deforestation) predictions of warming for tropical soils this century5,31. Further information on the plot design, thermostat control and power specifications can be found in Nottingham et al. 202013.

Soil gas-exchange and partitioning. Soil CO2 efflux was measured every week at four systematically distributed locations within each plot from June 2018 to September 2018 (representing the 3ºC surface soil-warming treatment); and was measured twice-weekly at two systematically distributed locations within the high-warming subplot from August to September 2018 (representing the 8ºC surface soil-warming treatment). Soil CO2 efflux measurements were made using an infra-red gas analyser (IRGA Li-8100; LI-COR Biosciences, Nebraska, USA) and at the same time we measured soil temperature (using a HI98509 thermometer probe; Hanna Instruments, USA) and soil moisture (using a Thetaprobe; Delta-T, Cambridge, UK) at 0–20 cm soil depth for a random location immediately adjacent to each soil collar.

Soil sampling. Soil for this study was sampled during the wet season (June–Sept) in 2018. We sampled during the wet season to ensure that there was no moisture limitation to soil microbial activity and soil processes, and no difference in moisture limitation among treatments. Soil was sampled from 0–10 cm depth from the mineral horizon for each subplot and analysed for properties: total elements, available nutrients, exchangeable cations, microbial C, N and P and enzyme activities using standard procedures (see below and Supplementary Methods). We calculated microbial carbon-use-efficiency (CUE) using microbial CNP and enzyme activity data using a stoichiometric method (see Supplementary Methods). Soil samples were stored at −60ºC until DNA extraction (see below). All analyses were performed on replicate soil samples (n = 5).

Soil properties. Soil microbial biomass C and N were measured by fumigation-extraction65,66 and extractable C and N were determined by fresh soil extraction in 0.5 M K2SO4. Extracts were analyzed for extractable organic C and N using a TOC-VCHN analyzer (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD). Microbial C and N were calculated as the difference between fumigated and unfumigated extracts and corrected for unrecovered biomass using a k factor of 0.4567. Microbial biomass P was determined by hexanol fumigation and extraction with anion-exchange membranes68. Extractable P was determined using unfumigated samples and microbial P was calculated as the difference between the fumigated and unfumigated samples, with correction for unrecovered biomass using a kp factor of 0.468. Exchangeable cations were determined by extraction in 0.1 M BaCl2 and detection by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (Optima 7300 DV; Perkin‐Elmer Ltd, Shelton, CT, USA). Effective cation exchange capacity (ECEC) was calculated as the sum of the charge equivalents of Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Mn and Na. Soil pH was determined in deionized water in a 1:2 soil to solution ratio. All analyses apart from total elements (C, N, P), cations, and pH were determined on fresh soils within 24 hours of sampling, and K2SO4 extracts within 6 h. All soil chemical properties are expressed on the basis of oven-dry equivalent soil (determined by drying at 105ºC for 24 hours).

Soil enzymes. We determined maximum potential enzyme activity (Vmax) and the temperature sensitivity of enzyme activity (Q10 of Vmax) for ten enzymes involved in C, N, P and S cycling. We determined Vmax and Q10 of Vmax for all treatments for in situ warmed soils (control, +3ºC, +8ºC). For the determination of Q10 of Vmax we determined Vmax for a range of temperatures using laboratory assays.
Enzymes involved in C cycling under study were: α-glucosidase and β-glucosidase (act on α- and β- bonds in glucose, respectively), cellobiohydrolase (acts on cellulose), β-xylanase (acts on hemicellulose) and phenol oxidase (acts on phenolic compounds). Enzymes involved in P-cycling: phosphomonoesterase and phospho-diesterase (acts on monoester- and diester- linked simple organic phosphates, respectively). Enzymes involved in N-cycling: N-acetyl β-glucosaminidase (acts on N-glycosidic bonds) and leucine aminopeptidase (acts on amino acid leucine from proteins). Enzyme involved in S-cycling: sulfatase (acts on sulfated glucosamines). For subsequent discussion, enzymes are abbreviated to: α-glucosidase (AGase), β-glucosidase (BGase), phosphodiesterase (BPase), cellolbiohydrolase (CEase), leucine aminopeptidase (LPase), phosphomonoesterase (Pase), N-acetyl β-glucosaminidase (Nase), phenol oxidase (PXase), sulfatase (Sase) and β-xylanase (XYase).  
Hydrolytic enzymes (AGase, BGase, BPase, CEase, Pase, Nase, Sase, XYase), were measured using microplate fluorometric assays with methylumbelliferone (MU)-linked substrates, except for LPase, which was measured using 1 mM L-leucine-AMC substrate (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). PXase was measured using 5 mM L-dihydroxyphenyalanine (L-DOPA) as substrate (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). Fluorimetric substrates were dissolved in 0.4% methylcellosolve (2-methoxyethanol; 0.1% final concentration in the assay). The hydrolytic fluorometric and LPase methods are based on the protocols described in Tabatabai 69 and Marx, et al. 70; while the PXase method is described in Sanchez-Julia and Turner 56.  
For each soil sample, five replicate micro-plates were prepared and incubated at 2, 10, 22, 30 and 40ºC respectively. For the fluorometric assays, 2 g fresh soil (field moist weight basis) was added to 200 ml of 1mM sodium azide (NaN3) solution and dispersed by stirring vigorously on a magnetic stir plate. After 5 min, and while stirring, 50 µl aliquots of soil suspension were removed using an 8-channel pipette and dispensed into a 96-well microplate containing 50 µl modified universal buffer solution adjusted to soil pH. Each microplate included assay wells (soil solution, buffer and 100 µl of 200 µM MU substrate; 100 µM MU substrate in final solution), blank wells (soil solution, buffer and 100 µl of 1mM NaN3) and quench wells (soil solution, buffer and 100 µl MU standard). For LPase, we used 1mM L-leucine-AMC substrate. There were eight analytical replicate wells for each assay, and control plates for each set of assays with the standards and no soil solution (to determine fluorescence from substrates and quenching by soil solution in assay plates). Microplates were incubated at each specified temperature for 1 to 4 h, with incubation times based on preliminary assays for each specific substrate to assess the linearity of the reaction over time. Following incubation, 50 µl of 0.5 M NaOH was added to each well for MU substrates (but not for AMC substrates) and plates were immediately analyzed on a Fluostar Optima spectrofluorometer (BMG Labtech, Offenburg, Germany) with excitation at 360 nm and emission at 450 nm. For PXase assays, 1g soil (oven-dry basis) was added to 100 ml of 5 mM bicarbonate buffer and stirred vigorously; 100 µl of 5 mM L-DOPA solution and 100 µl of soil solution were dispensed into a 96-well microplate. Control plates were made using 100 µl of 5mM bicarbonate buffer and 100 µl aliquots of soil solution. There were 16 analytical replicates and controls per soil sample. Plates were analyzed on a spectrofluorometer, with PXase activity calculated as the increase in absorbance at 450 nm over 1 h.  Enzyme activities were expressed on the basis of soil organic C. Hydrolytic enzyme activities, determined using MU substrates, were expressed in nmol substrate (MU or AMC) min-1 g C-1. PXase, determined using L-DOPA as a substrate, was expressed in mg diqc h-1 g C-1 (where diqc is the L-DOPA product 3-dihydroindole-5,6-quinone-2-carboxylate).  
We determined the temperature sensitivity of maximum potential enzyme activity (Vmax) by calculating Q10 values as follows:

Where k is the exponential rate at which Vmax increases with temperature (t)54. To calculate k (and thus Q10) we used linear regression and included enzyme data determined between 2ºC and 40ºC. We only determined Q10 values of enzyme activity during the exponential increase in activity with temperature according to Arrhenius kinetics, prior to reaching any thermal optima of activity at which dynamics depart from Arrhenius kinetics. The thermal optima of enzymes are widely associated with enzyme denaturation that begins to occur at temperatures above 40ºC 71.

Determination of carbon use efficiency.  
Changes in microbial community function, including growth and carbon use efficiency (CUE), has been shown by models to have an extremely large influence on the soil-atmospheric C exchange and soil C storage under climatic change16,48. However, empirical evidence on the long-term response of microbial community physiology and its influence on soil C storage is lacking, both in part due to a lack of long-term experimentation and in part due to methodological difficulties in quantifying the relevant microbial community response. Microbial CUE, for example, is an emergent property representing the ratio of C lost in respiration against C accumulated during growth72 and can be quantified in numerous ways, including using substrate-induced respiration (13C substrates)73; 18O labeling in water74; mass-balance and the stoichiometry of enzyme activity and biomass75. Because it is an emergent property and therefore challenging to quantify, CUE estimates can vary among methods and thus require interpretation with consideration of method used for its quantification. 
For our study we used two complementary methods to measure the response of microbial community physiology to warming, CUE based on the stoichiometry of enzyme activity and elemental ratios in the microbial biomass75 and the temperature response of bacterial and fungal growth following the incorporation of trace amounts of isotopically-labelled substrates33 (see section below). The stoichiometric method has been found to be robust and correlated to substrate-non-specific 18O labeling methods76 and is useful because it is based on direct measurements of soil properties and can be more easily compared among studies72. We estimated CUE from ecological stoichiometry whereby CUE is a function of the difference between its elemental requirements for growth (C, N or P in biomass and enzymatic investment for acquisition) and the abundance of environmental substrate (C, N or P in soil organic matter). This approach assumes that enzyme activities scale with microbial production and organic matter concentration, and that microbial communities exhibit optimum resource allocation with respect to enzyme expression and environmental resources; these assumptions are empirically supported by Michaelis-Menten kinetics and metabolic control analysis75. Based on this underlying assumption, CUE is therefore calculated as follows:



 where SC:X is a scalar that represents the extent to which the allocation of enzyme activities offsets the disparity between the elemental composition of available resources and the composition of microbial biomass; Kx and CUEMAX are constants: half-saturation constant (Kx) = 0.5; and the upper limit for microbial growth efficiency based on thermodynamic constraints, CUEMAX = 0.6. EEA is extracellular enzyme activity (nmol g-1 h-1); EEAC:N was calculated as BG/NAG, where BG = β-glucosidase and NAG = N-acetyl β-glucosaminidase; and EEAC:P was calculated as BG/P, where BG = β-glucosidase and P = phosphomonoesterase. Molar ratios of soil organic C : total N : total P were used as estimates of LC:N or LC:P. Microbial biomass (BC:X) C:N and C:P were also calculated as molar ratios. 
Using the stoichiometric method, we found no change in CUE in this study (on 3ºC and 8ºC warming effects during the wet season; Extended Data Figure 6), or over 2-years following 3ºC warming in surface soils13. However, given the apparent acceleration of enzyme activity via abiotic mechanisms (see discussion), we suggest that this renders low confidence in the stoichiometric method in this instance, given its assumption that enzymatic activity is correlated with biological synthesis75. Given this, to assess the effect of warming on soil microbial community activity (and to predict CO2 emissions) in this study we focus our attention on the instantaneous temperature response of microbial growth and respiration20,33 (see below).

Instantaneous temperature response of microbial growth and respiration. We used the instantaneous temperature response of microbial growth and respiration to: i) predict the effect of warming on in situ soil CO2 emissions and ii) to determine the temperature adaptation of the bacterial community following two years of in situ warming. For the former, we measured the instantaneous temperature response of respiration and bacterial growth for control soils only. For the latter, we measured the instantaneous temperature response of bacterial community growth for all warming treatments and controls; assuming the temperature adaptation of respiration responded similarly as for bacterial growth, as found in tropical soils elsewhere20. To determine the temperature response of bacteria growth, we used the leucine incorporation method19; for the temperature response of instantaneous respiration, we used incubation assays of 2 g soil in 20 ml vials for 24–140 hours at 10–30ºC and measurement of headspace CO2. Full details on these respective methods are described below.
The temperature response of bacterial community growth was determined by measuring instantaneous growth across a range of temperatures (4 to 40ºC) using the leucine (Leu) incorporation method77. Soil (1 g dry weight) was mixed with 20 ml 17ºC distilled water, vortexed for 3 min and centrifuged at 15ºC for 10 min. The supernatant, with an extracted bacterial suspension, was transferred (1.5 ml) into microcentrifugation vials, which were pre-incubated in water baths for 1h (at 4ºC) or 0.5h (at 35ºC) before 2µl 3H-leucine (1-[4,5-3H] leucine, 37 MBq ml-1 and 5.74 TBq mmol-1, Perkin-Elmer, USA) together with unlabelled Leu was added (resulting in 275 nM in the bacterial suspension). After 6.5 h (4ºC or 2 h (35ºC), trichloroacetic acid was added to terminate growth. Measurement of radioactivity was conducted following Bååth, et al. 77.
The instantaneous temperature response of respiration was determined by incubating 2 g fresh soil in 20 ml vials for 140 hours (at 10ºC) or for 24 hours (at 28ºC). At the end of each incubation, we sampled the vial headspace and determined the CO2 concentration (using a GC equipped with a methanizer and a flame ionization detector) to calculate the respiration rate per g soil.  To estimate the degree of microbial community adaptation to temperature we used two complementary indices, the theoretical minimum temperature for growth (Tmin)15 and the log ratio of activity at 40ºC /4ºC (temperature Sensitivity Index, SI)78. The Tmin index provides insight on temperature adaptation across a broader temperature range and is calculated by the rate of increase in activity across temperatures from 4–28ºC. The SI index provides alternative information on the temperature adaptation of the bacterial community including also high temperatures. Because Tmin and SI are closely related19,79 we report both values but focus our analyses on the response of Tmin.

Determination of Tmin for respiration and growth and the predicted response of CO2 efflux to in situ warming. The Tmin of microbial activity was calculated using empirically defined microbial activity across the temperature range 4–28ºC (where the increase in the SQRT of activity is linear), according to the Ratkowsky (square root) equation15,17:

where T is the measurement temperature, Tmin is the minimum temperature for activity (temperature where activity = 0) and a is empirically defined by the slope parameter from the square root of activity plotted against temperature; and where activity is either bacterial or fungal growth rates, or respiration. We determined Tmin for each field replicate (n = 5 plots).
We then used the instantaneous temperature sensitivity of bacterial activity (Tmin) to model the CO2 efflux response to warming, both with and without microbial community adaptation. To model the CO2 efflux response to warming we used the following equation:

where Tmin is for control soils. To model the CO2 efflux response to warming following temperature-adaptation of microbial communities, we refitted the model using the Tmin determined for bacterial growth in experimentally warmed soils for two years by 3ºC and 8ºC (‘adapted’ communities).

Treatment effects on soil properties. To determine treatment effects on soil CO2 emissions, soil moisture and temperature we used repeated measures ANOVA fitted by maximum likelihood (repeated measures model with time as random factor). To determine treatment effects (levels: control, +3ºC and +8ºC) on soil properties we used one-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey HSD tests. We used this approach for all soil properties, including enzyme Vmax and the Q10 of Vmax for each enzyme determined at soil temperature. Prior to analyses all data were tested for normality using a Shapiro-Wilk test and log-transformed where non-normally distributed.

Microbial community analysis. To determine temperature treatment effects on alpha diversity of soil bacterial and fungal communities, we first applied general prevalence filtering using the R package PERFect (PERmutation Filtering test for microbiome data)80 (v0.2.4). Here we used the function PERFect_sim with the alpha parameter set to 0.05 for the 16S rRNA data and 0.1 for the ITS data. We also applied two complementary methods of prevalence filtering to determine how filtering influenced alpha diversity estimates (see Supplementary Methods for complete details). We then calculated Hill numbers using the R package hilldiv81 (v1.5.1), specifically Observed richness (q-value = 0), Shannon exponential (q-value = 1), and Simpson multiplicative inverse (q-value = 2). We used Shapiro-Wilk Normality test and Bartlett’s test of Homogeneity of Variances to determine whether Hill numbers were normally distributed. In cases where both p-values were greater than 0.05 (parametric data), we used ANOVA followed by Tukey post-hoc analysis to test for significance. For non-parametric data (cases where one or both p-values were less than 0.05), we instead used Kruskal-Wallis followed by Dunn test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction. 

For soil bacterial and fungal beta diversity, we calculated distance matrices for the filtered data sets using unweighted and weighted UniFrac82 for the 16S rRNA data and Jensen-Shannon Divergence and Bray-Curtis for the ITS data. To test for temperature treatment effects on beta diversity, we used the vegan package83 (v2.5-7) to first calculate beta dispersion for the distance matrices (betadisper function), then perform a Permutation Test for Homogeneity of multivariate dispersions (permutest function), and finally run PERMANOVA (adonis function; assuming equal dispersion) or Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM; where beta dispersion was significant).

To identify ASVs from the bacterial and fungal communities that were differentially abundant across temperature treatments, we used Indicator Species Analysis (ISA)84 and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe)85. Prior to differential abundance analysis, we applied PIME (Prevalence Interval for Microbiome Evaluation)86 (v0.1.0) filtering to both complete datasets. PIME is a slightly more aggressive filtering tool specifically designed to work with data sets containing high variation among samples86 — a pattern observed in the +8ºC warming samples from the 16S rRNA data and all treatments from the ITS data (Extended Data Figs. 2c and 2f). PIME applies prevalence filtering on a per treatment basis and removes a substantial amount of within-group variation by eliminating low abundance ASVs in each treatment and retaining only those ASVs shared at the selected level of prevalence, within a given treatment86. Per the developer’s recommendation, we first rarefied all samples to even depths (per sample: 16S rRNA = 25,088 reads, ITS = 9172 reads) and then split the data sets by predictor variable (temperature treatment) using the pime.split.by.variable function in R. Next, we calculated all prevalence intervals from 5% to 95% (increments of 5%) with the function pime.prevalence and then used the function pime.best.prevalence to choose the best prevalence. The best prevalence interval was selected when the out-of-bag (OOB) error rate first reached zero or close to zero. The most prevalent ASVs (at the best prevalence interval) were retained from each split. Splits were then merged to obtain the final, PIME filtered data set. ISA was computed with the R package labdsv87 (v2.0-1)—ASVs were considered an indicator of a treatment if they had a p-value less than or equal to 0.05. LEfSe analysis was performed within the R package microbiomeMarker88 (v0.0.1) using the following parameters: pre-sample normalization of the sum of values set to 1e+06, lda_cutoff = 2, kw_cutoff = 0.5,  and wilcoxon_cutoff = 0.5. We used anvi’o89 (v7-dev) to visualize the distribution of PIME-filtered 16S rRNA ASVs represented by more than 100 total reads and PIME-filtered ITS ASVs represented by more than 50 reads. We then overlaid the results of the ISA and LEfSe analyses. Hierarchical clustering of ASVs was performed using Euclidean distance and Ward linkage against the ASV/sample abundance matrix while hierarchical clustering of samples was performed using Bray-Curtis distance and complete linkage. 

To assess potential drivers of change in microbial community composition, we used three subsets of metadata to test correlations with community change; 1) environmental properties, 2) soil functional responses, and 3) temperature adaptive responses. For each of the three metadata subsets, we performed the following steps: i) use Shapiro-Wilk Normality Test to determine which metadata parameters are normally distributed; ii) use the R package bestNormalize90 to find and execute the best normalization transformation for non-normally distributed parameters; iii) perform autocorrelation tests for all pair-wise comparisons; iv) remove autocorrelated parameters; v) run Mantel Tests to determine if any of the metadata subsets are significantly correlated with microbial community data; and vi) use the bioenv function (vegan package) to identify metadata parameters that are most strongly correlated with the community data. In last step, vii) we performed distance-based redundancy analysis (dbRDA) using capscale from the vegan package. First, we ran rankindex (vegan) to select the best community dissimilarity index. Then, we ran capscale for distance-based redundancy analysis. Next, we used envfit (vegan) to fit environmental parameters onto ordinations. And finally, we selected all metadata parameters that were significant for bioenv (see above) and/or envfit analyses for plotting the ordinations and vector overlays. For full details including all references on community analyses methods, see Supplementary Methods.










Figure Captions

Figure 1│ Microbial diversity decline and community change under 3ºC and 8ºC in situ soil warming in lowland tropical forest. Two years of soil warming caused significant decreases in (a) bacterial and (b) fungal diversity, determined by 16S rRNA and ITS sequencing, respectively. Data from the PIME filtered data sets for controls (blue), 3ºC warming (green) and 8ºC warming (red). Hierarchical clustering of ASVs (top dendrograms) based on Euclidean distance and Ward linkage. Hierarchical clustering of samples (right dendrograms) based on Bray-Curtis distance and complete linkage. Each vertical line in the main plot represents a unique ASV, where colour intensity indicates the log-normalized abundance, and no colour indicates an ASV that was either not detected or removed during prevalence filtering. The coloured bars below indicate ASVs that were enriched in different temperature treatments as determined by either Indicator Species Analysis (IndVal) or Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size (LEfSe). Additional data for each sample are presented in the plots on the right. Diversity estimates charts show the total number of reads, observed richness, Shannon exponential index, and Inverse Simpson index. Taxonomic profiles show the proportion of major classes (16S rRNA data) or orders (ITS data).

Figure 2│ The response of microbial growth and enzyme activity to 3ºC and 8ºC soil warming, and the relationship between the temperature response of growth and activity with microbial community changes. (a–b) Microbial growth was determined for bacteria for each treatment using Leu-incorporation incubation assays across a temperature range of 4–40oC. The minimum temperature for growth (Tmin) increased with warming (see b), but growth declined at high temperatures (>30–34ºC; see lighter shaded points in (a); these data were not used for the linear model to determine Tmin). (c) Activities were determined for 10 enzymes (ß-xylanase shown here, six others responded similarly; see SI) across an incubation temperature range of 4–40ºC. The maximum potential activity—at soil temperature per unit microbial C—increased with warming for 7 out of 10 enzymes (see d) and increased across high temperature ranges (to 40ºC) illustrating a decoupling of growth and activity above 30ºC.  (e) The microbial community composition change was related to the temperature response of growth (Tmin) and of enzyme activities (Q10 of Vmax) for i) bacteria and ii) fungi. Bacterial growth and enzyme activity are plotted using a linear transformation (square root). Microbial community composition change estimated using Distance-based Redundancy Analysis (db-RDA) based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity; see Extended Data (Table 2, Fig. 5) for relationships between community composition change and other soil properties. All analyses are for n = 5 plots.

Figure 3│ The response of soil CO2 efflux to in situ warming by 3ºC to 8ºC is greater than the increase predicted by the temperature response of microbial respiration and growth. (a). Data points are measurements of soil CO2 efflux from control (blue), 3ºC warming (green) and 8ºC warming (red). The response of CO2 emission to temperature was described by a square root function (‘Observed’ line; CO2 = 1.9 x T2 – 45; R2 = 0.68, P < 0.001, F = 556). The modelled CO2 efflux responses (‘Predicted’ lines) are based on measured Tmin at ambient temperature (blue dash line = no adaptation; CO2 = 1.21 x T2  – 0.17; R2 = 0.87, P < 0.001, F = 124) and Tmin change after two years of warming indicating community adaptation (green dash line = 3ºC adaptation, CO2 = 1.24 x T2 – 0.18; R2 = 0.87, P < 0.001, F = 118; and red dash line = 8ºC adaptation, CO2 = 1.25 x T2 – 0.20; R2 = 0.86, P < 0.001, F = 111). The box plots show the treatment effects on (b) soil CO2 efflux and (c) soil temperature (repeated measures ANOVA; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001). The centre line of each box plot represents the median, the lower and upper hinges represent the first and third quartiles and whiskers represent + 1.5 the interquartile range; the dashed lines represent means. The soil temperature and soil CO2 efflux by treatment was, for controls: 26 ± 1 ºC and 4.74 ± 0.25 µmol CO2 m-2 s-1, 3ºC warming: 29 ± 2ºC and 8.42 ± 0.44 µmol CO2 m-2 s-1, 8ºC warming: 34 ± 7ºC and 15.98 ± 1.68 µmol CO2 m-2 s-1) (mean ± one standard error, n = 5 plots). 